What is a database?
This is a collection of data.
Database allows us to organise data in a way that it is useful to us and it makes data management easy.

    Database management System(DBMS)
This is a collection of programs that allows us to access databases , work with data and it also allows controlled.
accesss to database users.
DBMS is like a piece of software that allows us to communicate with the database.
and it allows us to update, delete, insert, lookup Whatever inside the software.
 Types of DBMS
They are both represented well by PostgreSQL, MONGODB.
1)Relational DataBase: This consist of two or more tables with columns and rows.
The relation between tables and field is called schema.
All relational dataBase use something called SQL(Structured Query Language).
with SQL, we are able to communicate with the backend.
SQL: This is a standard language for accessing and manipulating database.
2)Non relational dataBase(NoSQL)
A non relational dataBase or a MONGODB lets you build an application without having to define the schema first.
with NoSQL we can just define the schema as we go.
MONGODB is document oriented i.e it stores information as documents.
MONGODB query language helps communicate with the backend

    How to set up PostgreSQL on our computer
Download PgAdmin
PgAdmin: This is an sql editor.
The PgAdmin has one default dataBase which is the Postgres
    How to create a table in PgAdmin
A table is an object on a dataBase that contains data.
creating a table means we have somewhere to store a data and view the data.
    There are two ways
1)right click "table", click on "create", click on Table.
here you can specify the table name, number of column and so on, then click save.

2)Through writing code in the queryTool
-we write sql code on the queryTool.
-ALways use single quotes for text strings
-right click on the created dataBase, go to query Tool.
-sql is not case sensitive(uppercase or lowercase).
-CREAT TABLE- This is an sql keyword.
-after using the 'CREAT TABLE' keyword, we add the table name and parenthesis.
-next we add the column name inside the parenthesis.
-next we need to specify the datatype of the column and its size ie 'VARCHAR'(varing character) and a parenthesis.
-we specify a szie inside the parenthesis(200):This is the size of a VARCHAR column. add a comma and move to the next line
-let's add another colume that contains number and datatype will be 'INTEGER'.
-we dont need to specify size for 'INTEGER' cos it comes with a specific size.
-once you are done with the create table, go out the parenthesis and add a semi colon.

-once your done with the code,click on "execute script"
-when you get a sucess message, the sql table has been created.
right click your created database and refresh
then go to schema, then Table to see the table created

    How to Inserting content into the table
-we use the keyword 'INSERT INTO' tablename and a parenthesis to insert data into the table.
-inside the parenthesis we write the names of the columns seperated by commas eg(product_name, price).
-we go to the next line(not compolsory, just for readability) and use the keyword 'VALUES' with a parenthesis.
-inside the parenthesis of values, we insert the vales for text with a quote and number without a quote
 and then add a semicolon outside the parenthesis eg('jeans', 50);.
-click the execute button again to run our statements
we get an error because we are re-running the 'CREATE TABLE' with the same tableName
how do we solve this error
1)delete the CREATE TABLE statement
2)Lets say we still want to keep the statement
Highlight the INSERT statement and click on the execute script,
we get a sucess message

    How do we see(grab) content(data) in our table
we use the 'SELECT' keyword and the specified column you want to see or you can use the '*' keyword to see all the columns
then go to the next line and use the keyword 'FROM' and the specific table you want to see the data then add a semi colon
eg1)  SELECT * 
    FROM tableName;
Highlight the SELECT statement and click execute script.

eg2) SELECT product_name, price 
     FROM tableName;
using the WHERE keyword to specify where we want to see in the row
    SELECT product_name, price 
     FROM tableName
     WHERE columnName = 'jeans';
highlight code and run

    How to add more values to an existing table
-You can simple change the VALUES inside the existing code and run it.

    How to change(update) data in the table
we can do this by using the keyword 'UPDATE'
-we start with the keyword 'UPDATE'
-then we specify the tableName
-move the next line and add the SET keyword and the columnName = value
note: if you dont add the WHERE keyword, it will update all the records in the table.
eg 1)UPDATE tableName
    SET columnName = value;

eg2) UPDATE tableName
    SET colunmName = 'newvalue'
    WHERE columnName = 'oldvalue';
we can also use the 'OR' keyword to update another column ie, WHERE columnane = 'value' OR columnname = 'value';

    How to delete data
This can be done using the 'DELETE' keyword.
-we start with the 'DELETE' FROM tableName
-we move to the next line and use the 'WHERE' keyword to specify which row to delete from
note: if you use the delete keyword without specifying the row, all rows will be deleted
click on the run script and you will get a sucess message 

    How to add another column to a pre existing column
we use the 'ALTER' keyword to change the table itself ie creating a new column
-we start with the keyword 'ALTER TABLE tablename'
-in the next line, we use the keyword 'ADD COLUMN columnName datatype(VARCHAR or INTEGER)' COLUMN is optional
then add semi colon.
example1
    ALTER TABLE product
    ADD COLUMN in_stock VARCHAR(3);
The 'ALTER' keyword can also be used to alter a colum that already exist.
example2
    ALTER TABLE product
    ALTER COLUMN in_stock TYPE INTEGER;

    Join the tables
In relational dataBase, we have a primary key and foreign key.
-setting primary keys when creating a table is important.
-primary key is a unique key to each row.
-foreign key is a column that refers to the primary key in another table



    How to add another column to a pre existing column(ALTER TABLE),(UPDATE TABLE), SET, WHERE
-SQL functions
1)AVG()
2)SUM()
3)COUNT() etc
    Join the tables
In relational dataBase, we have a primary key and foreign key.
-setting primary keys when creating a table is important.
-primary key is a unique key to each row.
schemas:having tables that are concerned with storing information specific to them and connecting them through a primary
key and foreign key
-A good way to manage your dataBase is to have small tables concerned with specific thing(seperation of concern)
then join tables together to get information from them.
-When you create a primary key, it creates another file that contains the keys
we use the JOIN key word to join tables
    Delete from table
we can use the DELETE FROM and WHERE keyword to delete from the dataBase
we can also use DROP keyword

website https://www.techonthenet.com

